They hired McCarthy, fortunately.
The other person they hired was the guy at Rice that sort of declined after he came here one day or something and turned around and declined it, which was good.
McCarthy, what was your first name?
Michael McCarthy.
But I'm trying to think of the person that they made the original offer to at Rice because they had to start the search committee over and Sweeney was interim dean at that point in time.
But the guy at Rice was an old style architect that had no clue about research or about anything else.
And I think he got up here and kind of realized, well and his wife too, his wife was a socialite in Houston and she said she couldn't live in College Station.
So they went on the next search and they hired Michael McCarthy.
who was a really good move.
A lot of the people don't like him but we had gone through Reed, Hicks and then an intern team for two years of where very little was happening in the college because nothing could happen.
And Michael McCarthy, it wouldn't matter who they hired, the person would have been fired within four years if he changed anything.
And he was a real visionary.
He came in and established the visualization lab, you know, the animation program.
He established all these different centers, you know, for urban development, for hazards research, all health stuff.
The whole thing was established with him because that was the basis.
You know, if you want a college running in the black, they have to bring in the research money.
And did those programs, are they part of the reason for the growth in student enrollment?
Yeah.
If I'm not mistaken, we presently have more PhDs than any other university in the U.S.
in colleges of architecture.
I think we're the highest dollar value.
It's usually between MIT, Georgia Tech, and Texas A&M.
And I think we currently have the highest dollar volume going.
But it's because of him that brought this in.
Romnick of course encouraged it when he was there.
He had a whole research division.
And other schools of architecture around the country just looked like, oh, research, what's that got to do with architecture?
And architecture is an art, not a science, et cetera.
So McCarthy came in and made all these sweeping changes.
He forced faculty that had been doing nothing but going to class and then going home or doing consulting, private consulting, to actually do papers, do research, or they didn't get raises.
and they didn't get summer appointments.
And they were furious, absolutely furious, outraged.
And anyhow he brought in several high-paying, high-rolling faculty members and he had turned everything around and there's still a few better faculty
You know, think he ruined the place.
Or we even had students protesting the Visualization Animation Lab, which is like the golden child of architecture right now.
But they were protesting it because computers were devil set, you know, and you should be doing hands-on stuff and things like that.
So, and then he encouraged Wolfgang and hired Atith Shikawi for the land development.
Who was that?
Atif Shikawi.
Can you spell that?
He's on the faculty now.
We have a directory up there.
And then this Fred Forgey they've hired, but that's been a really good growing program and it's like one of four nationally.
Then he's followed by Walter Windler.
Where did Walter come from?
Okay Walter went to Berkeley after he left Texas A&M.
And then he went to teach at LSU.
And then they hired him to come here.
I think Greer probably hired him.
And he got to be like assistant department head.
And then McCarthy had him be associate dean.
And then McCarthy was the one that put in that you really need PhDs if you're going to get research.
And so Walter had been doing work toward his PhD.
and had all but a year's worth of hours, and he made a deal with the education department at UT that he could come and be in residence for a year there, finish out the coursework, come back here and write his dissertation, which he did.
And Walter's disciplined enough that he can do that, whereas most people would like trail off and never finish it up.
But Walter was very good.
Walter smoothed the ways after McCarthy.
It's got, you know, everyone roughly off on any account, but kept going in the same direction, you know, with all the research and all the different papers and all the new directions and the animation and stuff like that.
20 years plus of progress, what were some of the key steps in the growth and development of the program?
Well, Romney was a key step.
And then starting about 69, 70, 72, our enrollment was starting to grow at, you know, like 25 percent a year.
And he made some very crucial hires of some very wonderful people, you know, during the 70s.
Whereas other universities around the U.S.
were cutting back, we were picking up.
And Dan McGilvery was a crucial hire.
Well several people through there were crucial hires.
And Romnick had a really good feel for people.
He could, you know, interview them and figure out where they were coming from, if they were really worth it, or if they were full of Mr. Romanek would put in shit.
And then I think we went into a low point until McCarthy came.
And then we were just holding on to our own.
And we had all the brilliant faculty that Romnick had hired kept the place going.
And then when McCarthy came we had another spurt of direction and research and new faculty hires.
And then Wendlers made some great hires during that time too.
You know, like landscapes, number two in the nation.
The planning, you know, for urban and regional planning department would be number six in the nation and the only one that's located in a rural area.
And the construction science is always either one, two, or three up there.
Architecture is number one for computers and architecture.
and then the research and all the different stuff that's happening.
Well, the land development is one of four programs.
They have a health care planning, which is one of five programs in the U.S.
For our number one son, Steve,
That was just the right program.
Oh, yeah, it's perfect.
He was not that good a designer for architecture, but his people qualities and all that has just worked well for him.
All right, trace what Rodney Hill was doing then in the late 70s, 80s, and 90s.
Well, when Romney left, I guess,
I started teaching only freshman design and some sophomore.
What was different about teaching first year instead of second year students?
For me there wasn't that much difference other than the freshman you were getting from a range of backgrounds, you know, that were just like, that could have come from Vulture Gulch to a very sophisticated Lamar High School.
Can you give some examples of those extremes?
Well, I mean, you had kids from deep country that had an accent so strong, you know, from East Texas, and then some people that have traveled all over the world.
What was interesting though, when they were doing their projects, about midway through the semester, it didn't matter where they were from,
you know, the quality of their designability came through and it didn't seem to matter on their environment, you know, where they were from.
Did you have any personal ways you developed where you tried to decide whether or not they had the creative ability to succeed in architecture?
Yeah.
Well, when I was developing it, you know, when I was doing the progressive relaxations and all of those, you know, I would just watch the students develop.
And what I would try to do was,
not look at where they were at that point in time but what they could be.
Because a lot of times you would get to the last project and all of a sudden you'd see the light go on, you know, and they finally realized what was happening and that they were the source that, you know, education, you know, the old thing, education isn't something that's done to you but by you.
They would just take off.
And then what you tried to do was open as many doors as you can, giving them as many directions so they could take off and you wouldn't, you know, be impeding their forward progress.
What about, do you have any stories, retrospective, where a student came to plead for mercy or ask for a second chance?
Oh, yeah.
Any good anecdotes?
Every semester.
There's someone always doing that.
Do you remember any where you gave a second chance and now in hindsight it really?
There were several I gave second chances to that in hindsight I won't do again.
Oh, but you won't?
Right.
Well, some of them that said, please, please let me turn in an extra project.
I'll do that.
Let me graduate.
Because if I don't graduate, you know, I've already got the invitations.
My grandparents are flying in.
So I'd let them graduate and they never came back with a project.
And that's almost to a T. And I did that probably with about six students.
What about on the other hand, some about whom you really had a lot of doubt, but now in hindsight they've turned out really well?
Oh yeah, I mean, there's several.
And there's Bill Peel, who I thought was just a really terribly average person.
But he was a real good leader in the Corps.
But I had suggested that maybe he needs to find another route.
He was the first marketing director of 3DI and then CRS tried to get him away and he said no I just became marketing director.
So the next year they came back and doubled his salary and he was responsible for bringing in like $20 million a month in work.
Then he became CEO of Pierce, Goodwin and Alexander and now he's with Metro National which has holdings of about 50 million and he's one of three partners in that and all he's doing is entrepreneurial development work.
But, you know, there's people like that that you think will never amount to anything.
And there's several of those that showed little or no interest in architecture.
And you just sort of closed your eyes and you let them graduate.
And then six years later, all of a sudden, they're loving architecture and they're, you know, way high up in their firms and you're going,
How did that happen?
In all these design courses, how did you grade?
How did you decide this was an A, B, C, or an F?
That was the hardest part.
It's all subjective.
But usually what I'd do is I'd pile the projects all out on the floor,
And then I'd put what I thought was an average one.
And then I would go on either side of the average one and try to work the grades that way.
And then a lot of times, if the person midway through woke up, you'd give a higher grade to encourage them.
You didn't grade on the curve.
No.
Sometimes I had just superb classes and they might all get A's.
And I taught mainly honors through the 80s and the 90s.
So most of the classes I had were the top students anyhow, so I wasn't running across any really bad
How did the quality of the students at their freshman year, how did it change from the late 60s to later years?
Were they more capable?
I'd say they're a little more capable than that.
I mean, there's a whole different clientele.
I would say most of the people that we got in the early 60s, late 70s, I mean early 70s, you know,
Probably with admission standards right now, I would guess 80% of them wouldn't have made it into A&M at this point in time.
So when you're asking them to do something now, research-wise, they wouldn't give you this blank stare.
they'd be off and doing it because I could have a kid coming in from Plano that has already taught himself C++ computer language and is already prolific in several computer things and is turning in freshman projects that look like they're out of Pixar.
and you're doing just unusual work.
If the person had done that back in the early 70s, you would have phoned the National Press or Time Magazine.
So I think you do see a big change.
And I think that's probably some problems A&M's getting into now is parents who did go to school in the 70s and their kids are now wanting to get in and they're at the same level their parents were and there's no way they're going to ever get into A&M.
Do you think in recent years you and your colleagues have been more rigorous because there's more talent?
Are you more rigorous?
Oh, I think so.
Yeah.
I think probably the grades may be about the same, but the quality's a whole lot better.
A lot of times when I was grading, if a person that was just incredibly talented just didn't do anything but wrote on his laurels and was just doing what he did at a very good level but showed no improvement, I would give him a lower grade than somebody who came in not knowing from Shinola and then passed the kid up.
So that was the only time I guess students would get huffy, that by comparison, you know, this person is not up to my level.
In these years of change, describe the enrollment of women in growing numbers.
What were the realities of that?
Right.
I mean, there'd be one or two, you know, in the class.
And then, you know, it's just been a gradual increase.
And I guess we're about 30 percent in the College of Architecture now.
Did the male students tease them or pick on them at first?
Not really.
A&M students I've found to be more gentlemen, more Southern Tech, I think even.
I've rarely found a crude male in the class.
I've found a couple of crude females that would tease the males.
You know, some naive male, that's happened before, but rarely have I seen males
You know, I've heard about it in the Corps, but I've never, I think architecture is a little more liberal-minded about male, female, and gender roles and things like that.
So I don't really see it.
How has Corps enrollment, Corps student enrollment in architecture, how has it?
Well, I mean if you had a design class.
You might have one person or two persons in your freshman design class that would actually be in the Corps.
And whereas before it was, you know, just almost half and half.
The Corps, I think, does themselves in, or they're used to, like...
Even in the honors group, say from about mid-80s to the present, there's only been two people in the Corps that started out in honors their freshman year that actually were in honors after one semester.
The bonfire did them in.
I had one kid that fell asleep.
That's why I was looking for a while ago.
He had mono.
And I said, why don't you go to the health center?
You don't have to go out and cut bonfire.
And he said, I can't.
let my core buddies down.
And I said, that's nonsense.
You know, you're going to kill yourself.
And so what I did, I let him come in and just curl up on one of the laboratory ledges and sleep, because that was the only time he got any rest.
And I let him turn his project in a month late.
But he never got his grades back up.
But that's been the case with most of the Corps, which I've told the Corps.
I was a Corps advisor for, believe it or not, five years, one of the faculty advisors.
And we went from, it was Squadron 5, went from last place to first place in that time.
And I had a lot of fun with them.
They had a four-star general coming in for review.
And they invited me to come meet with them at Dunkin' because they wanted some faculty there.
So I had welded five stars on this thing that hung in front of my American flag tie.
And I had my coat covered up and so I was right there with all of them in the dignitary thing right next to the four-star general and then the corps was marching by like that and so I opened up my corps and the students were all going .
How did you become a corps advisor, corps unit advisor?
I kind of have a knack for getting along with students.
I can sit down in a room with them and I guess it's fake control.
I don't want to have any kind of fake control.
I just will counsel them.
Did they invite you?
Yeah.
No, they invited me.
Like the first or the second year I was here, the Student Senate gave out a Student-Faculty Relationship Award.
And I got it for that year.
And that was Sharp and Riggs and Caperton and that bunch.
And then students in the College of Architecture would gravitate into asking about stuff because I wouldn't tell them what the company would want them to hear.
but how it really happened and what would be best for them.
And so it just happens that way.
How many years, how long did you do that?
Five years with the Corps.
But like right now if anything's happening in the College of Architecture, if a student was pulling a prank or doing something like that, I can find out about it.
None of the other props can because they'll know I won't turn them in and I'll work with them.
Can you give some examples of two or three goofy poems?
Yeah, a good one.
Back in the 70s when I was asking him to do a happening around campus, and one of them would climb up in the old Live Oak and then he would drop poems down in front of people.
you know, by threads.
You know, as people would walk along, all of a sudden there would be a poem there.
They were supposed to be made aware of, you know, the tree and their environment, stuff like that.
And then another one got in a rocking chair and she dressed up with a pose bonnet on over by the MSC and would rock along and then tell tales.
And then the morning everything was supposed to be due, there were
three core guys that hadn't done their thing.
And so finally I called on them and said, could you describe it?
And they said, can we talk to you after class about this?
And they were the ones that had gone and spray painted the lights on Kyle Field, red, white, and blue.
And they had evidently gotten blotted and climbed up with spray paint and painted the American flag on them and then
They went back and passed out in their courtroom.
And so the police came while they were there.
But they were so high up and the police never thought to look high up.
They just looked around the field.
So they got down without breaking their necks.
And so I guess it was Sunday or something.
They woke up and they found out from everybody else in the Corps that the police were searching all the cars going in and off campus for spray cans of paint.
And so they just sort of kept their car on campus for a week and then took it off and dumped all the cans but evidently they had to replace all the lights because they couldn't get them scrubbed off in time to the tune of about 5,000.
And so I've kept that quiet for many years.
Do you know of any planned, goofy, extreme pranks that you or anybody else was able to do?
Yeah, there's another real quick.
One student got arrested for cutting Nandinas under the President's house.
Over there they needed some model trees and a Nandina makes a really good tree at a certain scale.
And evidently he was out there clipping and the police arrested him.
And then another one that was fun, one weekend was... I was wondering, are they finished with the office?
but I'll lock them.
Some of the New Yorkers that were here, this was the second wave of them came, and they couldn't afford to go back home, so they were taking some summer school classes, and so they started, I guess they were part of the skydiving club, so they're out in the Skies Ranch, and some cattle were walking up, and they were all hungry, didn't have anything to eat,
One of them had a .22 in the back.
Ned barred this guy's pickup from the apartment.
And one of the guys from New Jersey, his dad was a butcher.
He said, I know how to butcher one of those.
And so anyhow, they got the .22 out and shot and put it in the back of the pickup and covered it with tarps.
And anyhow, hauled it back to their apartment off of college, took it out, did all the butchering, buried the carcass and everything in the backyard, and then had returned the truck, and it all got in plateau, returned the truck to the apartment, and they didn't wash out the bed.
Well, blood was dripping out of the back of the pickup.
So, you know, a date was coming in and she saw the blood and told her boyfriend and they all, you know, determined it was blood.
So they called the police and the police checked out everything and then went in with drawn guns on the roommate.
And the roommate was going, and he said, now I lent my truck, you know, and I went to bed before they returned it.
and he told them where.
So then they went over to where the party was still going in progress, steaks were frying, and then they arrested all of them for cattle wrestling.
and Manuel Davenport.
Were these architecture students?
All architecture students and Manuel Davenport was on the grand jury at the time fortunately and so anyhow you know all of these Yankees were there just you know because they'd heard of well they hang wrestlers in Texas so somehow Manuel worked out a deal with a rancher
that he would pay whatever the going price was for the cow.
And the rancher said, well I have one other thing that I request because all of them had long hair.
And he said they have to do a core shave, you know, over here on College Main.
And so that was the hardest thing for them to do, but they did.
And then paid him, you know, for the... And that was funny.
But let's see, what was another one that was like?
Oh, they had, when the police were raiding, they saw a big thing of wine that was being bestilled.
But they were all over 21.
But the police didn't say anything.
They thought they'd wait until it was fermented.
Then they would come back and arrest them for running a still.
And they did.
Two weeks later, they came back and arrested them.
But fortunately they couldn't get it passed because they were over 21 and the head of the household, etc.
They didn't have passed the legal thing there.
And then David Suppley, who's in Houston now, he also was about that time from New Jersey and he had really long stringy hair and he looked like David Manson.
And it was the same time as the Manson murders.
Well, he was moving into a spot over on Lake Street right off college.
The next door neighbor saw him and said, you're moving in.
And he said, yeah.
He said, how much are you paying?
He said, I'm paying $50 a month.
He said, I'll give you $100 if you don't move in.
And David thought, OK.
And he took the money and ran and hired in another place.
Some of the students get away with it.
Do you remember any planned pranks that you or somebody heard about that you were able to help prevent?
Well, there's one that just happened a month ago that we didn't actually prevent, we let it go through.
There were three foam statues wired together.
They were student projects and they were stuffed with carpet insulation and stuff.
And they had Mr. Left, Mr. Right, Mr. Middle.
And they were posing and it was an introduction to some presentation for one of the classes.
But they left the three sculptures there.
Well, the graduate class, one of the graduate sections decided, well, they would kidnap Mr. Middle and force the faculty to do penance to bring Mr. Middle back.
So all of us got flyers in our boxes with a guy with a ski mask with a revolver aimed at Mr. Middle's head, saying, if you ever want to see Mr. Middle again, you'll agree to the following da-da-da-da.
And so they had planned for five days on a Monday, Wednesday, Friday, you know, Monday, Wednesday, that there would be five performances by different faculty members.
The first one was David Woodcock had to recite the Jabberwocky with Andrew Seidel acting in constant.
Then the second one was they gave me freedom and said I could do anything creative I wanted to, but I had to entertain them for X number of minutes.
Then the third one, Dr. Mordell Shepley, who's head of our PhD program,
who is also a modern dancer, she had to dance the Monster Mash in, you know, creative.
And then, let's see, who was next?
Oh, Guillermo Vázquez, who's from Peru, had to recite Green Eggs and Ham in Spanish.
And then the following one, the dean had to recite, he was supposed to yodel the Aggie War Hymn.
And he was a very good support about it.
He went into a history of yodeling, very professorial like.
And then he did try to yodel, which was, I gave him credit for that.
Now these performances were given where?
In the atrium surrounded with students.
And they video recorded all of them.
Midday?
And they recorded all of them.
And the proceeds for the, went for what?
Oh, there was no proceeds.
Oh, I thought you said.
It was to get Mr. Middle back.
Oh, oh, oh.
No sculpture.
Oh, there wasn't any money.
No.
And did he come back?
Oh, yeah.
And in what?
In good shape.
And then what happened to him?
No, he's still there.
Oh, oh, okay.
But it was just, I think they want to do it yearly now.
They'll kidnap something.
Were there any playing stunts, pranks that you heard of that you or somebody were able to get stopped?
Well some I didn't get stopped.
Like one of the students I heard at the end of the semester were sacrificing their projects to the gods and they would go up on the fourth floor of the architecture building after their project was graded and then they would see how far it would sail, you know, to the grassy spot and sling it out like a frisbee.
And so one of the students got up there and decided his wasn't going to sail at all, but he'd burn it instead.
And so it was on a metal area, but somebody about oceanography happened to be in their office and looked down and saw a fire starting and phoned the police.
Well, the police came running up to the fourth floor, you know, and handcuffed the guy and, you know, ran him off.
So...
See, I'm trying to think.
I'll have to think about stopping some.
Do you remember anything that any... Most of them I didn't stop.
Any that were mean in nature?
No, most of them weren't creative and good-hearted in nature.
I don't think anybody did really anything mean.
You said no problems with women.
What about as the student body becomes ethnically diverse?
None with students.
What was interesting was we decided to have what we call PAC, Peer Advising Council, and what we would get with juniors and seniors that would counsel incoming minority students.
And we had that going on about
three years.
And then finally, I mean, it was like pulling hen's teeth to get them to come.
And we would bring in speakers, black or Hispanic speakers from around the state that would come in.
And finally, when I